I'm sorry, Dave, you said this is probably... I don't mind showing you, Mr. Scullers.
In many cases, I sit there with them so that they don't accidentally... Now, there were actually two crusades before the main crusade.
The main crusade, you remember, had Henry the Lionhearted and Barbarossa, Frederick Barbarossa, and so forth.
And that was the third crusade that had Henry the Lionhearted, and that's the one we're talking about.
So this is the big one, where all of Europe got together, and they went down there, and they were going to save their maintenance and take over the land, make it safe for Americans.
I mean... What a marvelous place.
What a good excuse, eh?
Now, I put this here so I don't have to touch this, but this is, you can see this is right here, and this is right here.
And here are the words right here.
You can even make out these words that, to show you the flavor of the document, this one says, signum vivifus, who knows, crucix in vestro pectoris circumference.
This is the sign of the living cross on your proud chest, on your round chest, in Latin right.
So he's saying that you are going to be wearing the sign of the Holy Cross, and they had this big red cross, which was the English, by the way, I don't know what, it was the English flag, had a big red cross, and that's what the knights would wear, completely white uniforms or robes with a white cross on their chest.
And so he said that's one thing he has to put in.
Did you tell me the year in this, by the way?
1183, I believe.
I don't see.
Only 800 years old corn.
All right.
In good shape.
What is that green thing?
Is that a stitch?
Is that like a stitch?
Yes, that's what you call ancient preservation.
Instead of... Nowadays, they can almost create new paper around and reseal a pair.
A hundred years ago, they used to use something called scotch tape.
Yeah, well, I'm glad they used that.
Yeah, well, either one.
Yeah, that's better.
Do you have a provenance for this?
Do you know where it's been for the last 800 years?
No, I don't.
I don't.
I know where I got it from, but I... It's interesting to know where it spent centuries.
Yeah, that's true.
Something one of your scholars can go do.
We can have this fit with modern-day techniques, which you can barely see the thing.
But my theory is that 100 years from now, our modern-day repair techniques are going to look like the stitching that they did probably in the 1200s, trying to stitch it back together.
And so why not leave the document, carefully use it, and then let some future generation fix it perfectly rather than fix it with some medieval technique that we have today.
You're looking to the future.
Yeah.
So I never touched
Unless it meets de-esignification, we never try to repair document.
We'll leave it for 100 years from now when they really know it.
Or 200 years from now when the estate's worth $560 million, as you said.
My own thought, of course, is that means you never repair it.
Unless they prove that their technique is, you cannot tell the difference between their repair and their embodiment.
Then they can go ahead and do it.
Until then, you leave it until science is up to that stage.
And it's in good shape, actually.
Yeah, except for the tears, it's in good shape.
For 817 years, I mean... Of course, this is an animal skin, and that usually, if someone didn't fold it up five million times, it would still look brand new, which animal skin does.
Did you say from John you got this as well?
No?
No, I did not.
I got it from someone else, which I... Some I can talk about, but rather than... That's fine.
Don't mind my asking.
The Confederate Constitution, they did not want me to say where it came from, so I didn't, you know, for so many years, and I think the years are off, that's why I was trying to think of what his name was.
But a lot of these things, people are embarrassed that they are, you know, trading them in for money and so forth.
Yeah, but they've gone to a good place.
Oh, yeah, I think they have, because we're going to make sure everybody gets a chance to see him.
And you're going to protect them and preserve them.
Absolutely.
And allow access to them.
That's the key.
That's it.
And then I think we can wrap it up.
Okay.
We've got to go see.
We're trying to have everybody once.
We usually have two or three a day.
And then for a couple of days long.
Well, let's get used to it.
Thank you.
Thank goodness.
Dave's license plate, Annette, is California license plate, the words D-A-D-A, the next word K-A-R, Dakar, and it's a Cadillac, a sense of humor.
One of the questions that they are very interested in, is book selling different today from what it was in Dr. Rosenbach's time?
That's one of her questions.
And of course, you see what Lou is doing, and they're businessmen.
I mean, at that extent, it's different.
We're all merchants in the final analysis.
For the sake of my typist, I just want to say that Annette, we're talking to you.
Ralph Sipworth is president of Joseph the Provider, which is a very highly regarded and excellent bookseller of modern first editions in Santa Barbara, California, August 8th, right?
Thank you, Ralph.
Well, I was going to say that one, I think, basic difference between selling books in 1990 and back in the 30s and 40s is that the process has become more democratized.
In the old days, someone like Dr. Rosenberg would have his two or three
And they were usually, you know, captains of industry, very wealthy men, like, maybe like Bradley Martin.
And they would do most of their business, or at least a large part of it, just with a very few customers.
And they were, to the collector, a gentleman book seller.
Because young people did not collect to the degree that they do now.
We still sell to some very wealthy people.
But we have lots and lots of upwardly mobile, young, I guess you could say,
but that really is not the right word.
But just young, educated people who like the idea of collecting first editions, you know, who have the pride of ownership, like the idea of seeing these beautiful objects on their shelves.
Do you think it's a passion for the book, as it was, say, for Bradley Martin?
I really hate to use the phrase, but one person, I think we use it.
Well, investment in disposable income.
I mean, I'll be like, Southern California, we see what is referred to as disposable income.
Actually, no income is really disposable.
Do you find that this is one way that people feel it's a little bit of money?
Well, my experience is that the best collectors are interested in the books.
However, having said that, and living in our society today, to deny the importance of spending your money in a way in which not only is it not foolish, but with thoughts down the line of possible appreciation, I think that's inescapable.
It's just that I do think that the people
who have come, at least to us, over the last 10, 15 years, or like 10 years, with investment paramount in their mind, those people usually don't stay the course.
They get in, and then they get out, and they're on to something else.
I think that books are special, and that in order for someone to stay a book collector, he has to have some feeling for it.
I have two questions.
How long is Joseph writing?
Well, we're getting ready to do our 20th anniversary catalog, which is what I was doing before you came in.
When you send me one, you'll inscribe it.
Sure.
Would you do that?
That would be nice.
I'm collecting inscribed things along the room.
Interesting.
when I looked at the Dr. Miller book and I said, ah, it's not a very good condition right now.
Obviously, I was being sarcastic because it's great.
And you said, Joseph, the provided condition.
Tell me about that, because you do have a reputation.
Well, um... The quality of your books, you can... Well, it's just that there are certain rules to this game.
One of the rules, outside of the intrinsic importance of a book, is its condition.
And I guess...
a long time ago, we decided that we were going to really go to inordinate lengths to get the finest copies that we could afford and correspondingly to pass up decent or ordinary copies of books that we could buy and sell for a profit because we felt that having those ordinary copies
would take away from the idea of what we were trying to do, which is find the best to collect as copies.
And, you know, I think it's kind of a challenge.
From the beginning, are you the founder of Joseph of the Vieta?
Just tell me, I mean, I know the genesis of the name, but tell me why you chose the name of Joseph of the Vieta.
I can tell you very briefly, but I can also give you something I wrote on it.
Basically, Joseph was my grandfather.
He died when I was young, and I guess it was my first close personal experience with death.
I just cast about when I decided to start this crazy business 20 years ago for
something that didn't sound like the Book Nook or the Book Corner.
And it just came to me, and then the whole idea of providing books for people and that literary allusion to Thomas Mann, it kind of all came together.
Probably the one intuitive idea that I've ever had.
Well, the logo is actually a photograph.
It was an artist's rendition of a photograph of my grandfather.
And now that I've gotten older and started to gray, little people say that it looks a little like that.
A lot of people mistakenly say, Joe, call you Joe.
A lot of people call you Joe.
Yeah, I think they do.
Joe's a pro.
He's actually Rob Sibler.
Was Larry in from the beginning with you?
No, Larry came in about a year later, but as I say, I will give you something that way.
Okay, great.
Did you define your scope from the beginning as modern for us?
Yes.
And why is that?
Well, I mean, let's face it, it's the easiest entree into rare books.
But I was an English major, and where was this?
At City College, New York, and I was a New Yorker.
Yeah, right, and had kind of haphazardly pursued a masters and was writing book reviews for several publications in New York and reading contemporary literature.
So that's what we got into.
About a year or two after we started, we expanded a little and then decided that rather than
stretch ourselves thin and maybe dilute the quality of the books that we handle, we would limit ourselves to 20th century literature, more or less.
But within that small framework, expand from within.
And so we have done little things through the years, like we were, I think, among the very first to collect Vietnam War novels.
and baseball literature, and black literature, and Hollywood novels.
And these are all little pockets.
And you do put out specialized catalogs.
We do.
Subject literature, too.
One of your catalogs that I love is books that became movies, which is a great Hollywood edit.
You get a lot of Hollywood people that would love to.
Well, I do.
There's, I think, a growing interest in that field because a lot of the bright, young kids who are not coming out of college don't go into literature.
They become movie makers or they write for television or the movies.
And so there is that interest.
You know, it's kind of a very personal interest that a lot of
younger people have, and they're not limited to people around LA.
Do you agree with the assertion some people make that the real action in book business and book traders out here in California?
Well, I think that as the population of the country has shifted westward to places like the Sun Belt and the west coast, and as some of the inner cities back east
Detroit, Philadelphia, New York, where the quality of life has deteriorated and where corporations have deserted by the hundreds.
I think it's inevitable that there are more book collectors coming out west and residing in California than ever before.
I think it's a trend that hasn't seen its end.
showed you our mailing list.
Most of our collectors are really on both coasts, either in New York or Boston or Philadelphia, or up and down California and Oregon, and are disproportionate, really.
But most of them come from California.
So would you say most of your business is a catalog trade, or do you have people that come to the store?
Oh, no.
do come, but they come the way you've come for a particular purpose.
Or if they drive and sleep... I've been in business with you for a number of years, bought quite a few books from you.
The booksellers come through and collectors, but basically we're mail-order audiences.
And I think one reason that you can do so well through the mail is because your quality is understood.
I can buy a book from you
And I know I'm not going to be disappointed in the quality.
Or you have thoroughly explained its condition to my satisfaction.
Well, we try.
I mean, we're not involved.
I mean, we can't satisfy everybody.
And it is a subjective thing.
Cuts, well, your prices are higher than others.
You might be, but of course, you probably have to pay more.
Well, they're higher, but I think one has to talk about a particular copy.
I mean, I can't say that.
situation normal is a $200 book or a $300 book or a $500 book or a $10 copy.
It depends on the copy.
You're not buying the book.
You're buying a copy of the book.
Is it inscribed?
You know, who it is inscribed to and all that.
Do you find that there's a different kind of collector in California?
And this kind of came up, and let me give you the background on it.
And Luke said it for publication.
He has people that come in and say, gee, I want to be a book collector, and I want a collection within a year or two years, and build me a collection, and here are some names.
I've never heard of that kind of a collector before.
Well, I think... I'm sure implicit in this is that there's a lot of money going to be... Well, there is, and also Lou and Ben are right in that.
you know, little strip of land there, you know, where they all drive, where all the little, not only the little blue-haired ladies, but, you know, the people who are busy all day and who can't devote the time to developing their book collections the way, you know, a book collector usually knows his collection better than anyone else.
That's right.
But I can see where Lou and Ben, because of their reputation and their location,
have attracted that kind of approach to bookselling.
It's not, I don't find too many people like that.
I do get people who, once they start, will ask, you know, for help.
But to say what I think you're saying is that they are placing the responsibility for what goes into the collection to the bookseller, pretty much.
And that is not, you know,
my experience very often.
I'm not against it.
Who would be?
I'm not even being critical of it.
Sure.
It certainly does represent a departure from what I've seen.
That's right.
It is.
And maybe it's going to become more global.
But I think even that Heritage as an institution represents a departure of bookselling from what I've seen.
I mean, they really do approach it quite proudly as businessmen.
I think that's one of the
but leads us back to what we talked about at the beginning, about the change from the Rosenbach kind of John Fleming's book practice, where they only dealt with the very top stratum of the market.
And Lou and Ben, I mean, they started with nothing, and they have now, I think, one of the top book firms in the world.
They're more permissive than we are about certain things, like conditions.
I mean, they can have the greatest copies, too, but it won't be... It's just a different approach.
Well, which for them, which for them?
Well, see, that's one of the things I like about being a bookseller, is that there are
so many different ways in which, you know, you have the independence to run your business.
I mean, I liked, one of the reasons I got into the book business was I liked the idea of just buying a book, putting it in a catalog, sending the catalog out, and back comes a check in the mail.
And you mail this book out and you never have to look at the customer.
That was enormously appealing to me.
And it's much better than buying a bookshop, or establishing one, and then just sitting there and waiting for people to come in the door, and then maybe talking to somebody you don't feel like talking to, or being bound by regular hours.
One of the questions that the editor of the publication has asked me, because the hook I'm trying to hang on is the Martins and Daviti sales.
really great sale in the last 20 years, kind of a watermark sale.
And so then she said, well, our auction is really exciting.
And I said, it will be an hour exciting.
And I took notes of one exchange, Ralph, where you were sitting at the right rear of the South Beach room and spent on the room from the 1970 bookshop.
Oh, yeah, Steve Longstall.
Steve.
Steve Longstall went head to head
up to $60,000 for an item, and he finally purchased it.
I don't recall the item.
It's in my notes.
There might be a change.
But that was as exciting an exchange as I've seen.
It wasn't the $2 million of the Shakespeare's, but it was... Well, it's interesting because
what happens, and we talked about this, some of those high Bradley Martin prices came about as a result of what I call auction fever, where you don't want to give up the book, even though your head is telling you that's too much to pay for the book.
Your heart, your ego are saying, I'm not going to let him get that book.
And so you do that in an open arena.
And the same thing does not obtain when a
when you put out a catalog, then you're trying to usually stay within reason.
Also, there's a difference between a bookseller buying a book for stock or a client.
In this case, I believe I was acting on the instructions of a client, and I may even have exceeded those instructions a little bit.
you know, I felt that it was worth pursuing.
What goes through your mind in a thing like this?
Well, you don't have a chance to really think.
I mean, it all happens so fast.
The best thing to do is be prepared, you know, and we do a lot of studying.
And, you know, I think it was probably one of the James Joyce books and Scribe Joyce.
I would have to check.
It's all a blur now.
It was so intense because you were looking at each other.
And that doesn't normally happen.
I mean, even at the much higher
Sometimes you're bidding against the telephone, or some guy behind the glass upstairs.
But you two guys, he was at the left extreme, he was at the right extreme, and looking at each other, and he would go, and he would go, and I was standing right here in the room, and I said, this is really exciting.
Yeah, but see that talking.
That's also part of this democratization I'm talking about.
When I came to New York to look at the Bradley Martin books, who was there?
but Steve and Lou, or Ben, whoever was there, and 15 other people, dealers, with whom we are friendly competitors.
And, you know, there are only a few of us at these things.
And what's happening is because of the publicity and because of a growing public preference for high spots,
I mean, not every book at the Bradley Martin sale went for, you know, record... Yeah, sure.
What I'm saying is that, but for the very important, the high spots, those books, you know, usually went for two, three times.
Or more.
Yeah, or more.
And so that's, I think, a recent change.
And someone like Mark Hein,
I think is as good at it as anybody, you know, pursuing the high spot.
Mark likes to say, you know Mark, don't you?
Mark likes to say, I only know a hundred books, but I know those, I think I know those books as well as anyone.
Well, I mean, you know, he's being a little facetious, but what he has done is, he is not interested in every Herman Melville title, but, you know, Moby Dick, yes.
and so on down the line.
Huckleberry Finn and Tom Sawyer, but maybe not some of the rarer, but more obscure Mark Twins.
Scarcer, perhaps.
Yeah, scarcer.
Scarcer isn't necessarily rare, isn't it?
No.
Oh, no.
A rare book does not necessarily have to be a scarce book.
There are perhaps 30 or 40 Gutenberg Bibles, for instance.
Well, I mean, there's a book vocabulary just like there's a wine vocabulary, and when people
In common used terms, they get to mean the same thing to those people.
But someone outside the book world might look at a catalog and say, see, a good copy only, and say, oh, that's wonderful.
Well, a good copy is, you know, a euphemism for a bad copy.
Good means lousy.
Yeah, good means lousy.
Very good means okay.
So there are conventions that, you know, you learn.
If you start to get interested, it's fine.
Sure, but one person's fine, and another's very good.
I mean, so that's, you know.
Do you have 20 years in the business?
What did you do prior to book selling, by the way?
Oh, I just had various editorial jobs, sales.
I drove a truck for a while.
And you moved out here when?
I started a novel.
I mean, there are all kinds of things.
And you moved out here when?
In 1957.
And then three years after that.
Do you have, I mean, my book, and when we say book collecting, of course, it's a generic term that embraces manuscripts, of course, and it's important.
And it's really about the passion of the collector and the motivation of the collector.
And as one who is in the business and who has dealt with people such as myself for 20 years, do you have a fix?
Do you have an understanding of what passion, what it is that drives a person to learn to own?
Well, it is, but I think that, well, for one thing, I think that they were born collectors.
Carter Burton, who was one of the foremost collectors of our time, Carter told me that when he was, I don't know, three, four years old, he was already collecting toy soldiers.
And I collected toy soldiers, but I didn't have them anymore.
I mean, I either broke them or
threw them away.
Carter still has this, because that was in him, and I can define it by the instinct to preserve something, and the pride of possession.
Those two, I think, are very important motivations for a collection.
I guess the best way it's ever been expressed for me is Larry McMurtry wrote a book about an antique dealer called
Yeah, okay.
Well, I mean, Cadillac Jack goes to visit this man who, of all things, has accumulated and collected bird's nests.
All sorts of bird's nests.
And he comes into this house, and they're all over the place, on the walls, and he's tripping over them.
And I guess the collector, I forget exactly, the collector's over them, and for some reason he wants to divest himself of them.
And he asked Cadillac Jack, and Cadillac Jack says something like, well, you know, I really don't know what I would do with them.
And the collector would stare there and say, do with them?
Why, you'd have them.
And that idea of just wanting to possess, that's what I think a lot of collecting is about.
Talk to me a little bit.
Because I listened to you, John, and we mentioned you, and we'll be writing about him, can you just tell me a little bit about working with him to be, in fact, about him?
Sure, yeah.
I just wanted to add one little thing about this idea of collecting.
What I like is not so much having a book.
I mean, I have lots of books at home, and some of them, by chance, are rare.
You know, maybe Larry McMurtry inscribed a book to me, which he did.
And it's in my library.
But it's not there because it's a rare book.
It's a book that I had.
But I like the idea not of having the book, but of providing it.
Of saying, I had that book in that condition twice.
So, yeah.
Not I have, but I have had.
And it's kind of a rationalization.
I gather you get satisfaction then in helping other people build their collections?
Oh, sure.
Sure.
I mean, that's kind of a vicarious... But I mean, the books physically may not be yours, but you have... Right.
Well, you mentioned John.
Now, I do take pride in having gained, to a certain degree, John's confidence
and having been able to pass along, you know, books to him.
And the way I met him was, you know, he came around to book fairs, very quietly.
For two, three years, he might have even come up to Boston.
You know, I know you were always up there.
Yeah, I don't know what we're going to say.
Well, but he used to come at least to the California fairs, yeah.
I never came to Boston because Peter Stern told me that they took him out to lunch.
He made a film there.
And he might have asked me a question or two, and of course I noticed him.
I didn't know who he was at the time, because I don't really have time for watching much regular TV programming.
But, you know, I just recognized that this was somebody who was asking the right questions, even though he was a novelist.
And I could see not only a genuine interest, but a kind of pragmatic intelligence.
And then, after he started buying some books, I realized that he also had the ability to buy.
And I need to confront him.
And he certainly understands this collection.
He does, and he's not driven to have every last book.
He has patience.
There's one book he wants, desperately, that's an inscribed copy of Endgame.
I know that.
He told me that.
And that really is the whole, to me, this is what made him a collector when he was playing Ham.
I mean, he started collecting Beckett because he was taking Beckett's writing and giving it life on the stage, which is a really very wonderful example for me as a collector.
And you found that Beckett collection, which is wonderful.
Could you describe it a little bit for me?
It is an association collection.
Well, it's a collection that is another collector built over a period of time.
It wasn't complete, but it was pretty good.
And then when we got it, we filled in some of the obvious holes, you know, because we do have contacts.
But, you know, essentially, the nucleus of it was there.
See, if you wanted to collect Beckett today, and you came to me with five or ten times the amount of money that, say, John paid for the collection, I couldn't produce those books.
I mean, I probably could over a period of time, but it's not only having the money, but having the right copies available.
at one time.
It does, but also these things dry up.
They disappear into institutional collections.
How did this happen?
Did you learn of a collection that was for sale and advise John of it?
Well, first, no.
I mean, first, you know, John was buying isolated Becker titles from us.
And then, several years later, when I learned of the availability of the collection,
I approached Sean and I said, I've got a chance to buy it.
I would say that's a major, that actually makes his collection that particular element.
Well, we put ourselves on the line a little, I must say, because I didn't know who was going to buy it, but I had to make a business decision on whether to bring the collection back here or not.
And so I did.
So you had the way I was going to buy it.
Well, sure.
That's part of the excitement, too, is for a bookseller to, I guess I can say it inelegantly, put his money where his mouth is.
There are a number of booksellers in the ADAA who are very conservative.
They will not buy a book unless they're 99% sure that they're going to sell it.
In my mind, that's not the mark of a great bookseller.
is the other end of the poll, the other poll, which is that booksellers who have no discrimination, which is buy, buy, buy, and they're always struggling, you know, with problems of cash flow.
You have to kind of find a middle ground there.
Yeah, can I cut a burden on everyone on September 13th?
He's an example of, he's pretty quite unusual.
He is.
Well, I mean,
the breadth of Carter's collection.
89,000 volumes.
Well, it's more than a number of volumes.
I mean, what Carter set out to do is collect every book by every American author from, say, 1875 hours.
You know, he realized after a while that that was too broad, I mean, way too broad.
But he had the, I guess, the vision and the ambition to do that.
And in means.
And in the last few years, he has divested himself of some of his art collections, and he's sold several other collections to other dealers.
But I think we've helped him dispose of half a dozen of his art collections.
He gave all of his science fiction, you know, thousands and thousands of books to the Neopublic Library.
on that level, I mean, you can do that.
Well, it's probably a leading process written now.
It's refinement.
The mandate that you start with has to be, you have to have a course correction at some point.
He ran out of room.
Carter ran out of room.
Okay, I will give you the quintessential movie image of a collector.
And this is a true story, and I will not name the collector.
But this is a collector in New York who collected on
not quite the grand scale that Carter did, but very wealthy.
And the money really came from his mother, who doled it out to him month by month because he's sort of an irresponsible kind of guy.
And he was always buying books and paying for them at a slightly slower pace than he was taking them in.
And when you got to his house,
six rooms, seven rooms, there were books all over, you know, floor and ceiling shelves stacked up on the floor, in the bathroom, unopened packages, books that had come back from the slipcase makers, and his bed was a king-size bed, and it had on it, on this rectangle, books that were stacked maybe eight, ten eyes,
And, I mean, how many books can you put on a bed before they tip over?
You know, that kind of level.
Except, over the whole bed, except for this little fetal-shaped area where he curled up.
And he slept with his books.
Right.
He'd also gone through three or four wives.
Just a practicing collector?
Well, yeah.
And in New York.
You know, we've got to go catch a 7 p.m.
plane.
Do you have any questions for us?
It seems to be very helpful in the COU.
Anyone there?
Excellent.
Yeah, I'm really glad we made the trip.
We're talking about Margo.
Yeah, but don't attribute this to me.
What happened was that Heritage Board, they collection.
heritage.
And Maury bought that collection.
I sort of told them about it.
It was about 9,000 books, and it was like, you know, like typical booksellers went through.
Here was a collection of 9,000 books bought by this little haberdasher in New Jersey named Norman Unger.
They bought these books one at a time
uh many times got them inscribed and then put them away you know 10 copies of naked in the dead 20 copies of catcher in the ride put them away in his basement for 40 years and uh 20 years died and then his heirs came to uh an auction and kept hearing heritage and approached lou and then after the book fair after the auction sold him the collection this was the hemiro collection no this was modern literature
and uh and uh eventually i know i heard about it i guess through us and went down to l.a and bought the collection you know